.. _relational_metadata:

Relational Metadata
===================

In order to work with complex dataset structures you will need to pass
additional information about your data to SDV using ``Metadata``.

Let's go over an example to see how to use it.

Load the demo data
------------------

In order to follow this tutorial you will need to load one of the demo
datasets included in SDV by calling the ``sdv.load_demo`` function.

.. ipython:: python
    :okexcept:

    from sdv import load_demo

    tables = load_demo()

The output of this function will be a dict that contains several tables
as ``pandas.DataFarmes``.

.. ipython:: python
    :okexcept:

    tables


You can observe that this dataset has the following structure:

-  A ``users`` table with:

   -  A ``user_id`` field which acts as the table primary key.
   -  Two categorical fields, ``country`` and ``gender``, and an integer
      column ``age``.

-  A ``sessions`` table with:

   -  A ``session_id`` field which acts as the table primary key.
   -  A ``user_id`` field which is a foreign key to the ``users`` table
      and defines a One-to-Many relationship with it (one ``user`` can
      have many ``sessions``).
   -  Two categorical fields ``device`` and ``os``.

-  A ``transactions`` table with:

   -  A ``transaction_id`` field which acts as the table primary key.
   -  A ``session_id`` field which is a foreign key to the ``sessions``
      table and defines a One-to-Many relationship with it (one ``user``
      can make many ``transactions`` within a single ``session``).
   -  A datetime field, ``timestamp``.
   -  A float field, ``amount``.
   -  A boolean field, ``approved``.

Let us now see how to build a ``Metadata`` object that represents this
dataset.

The Metadata class
------------------

In SDV, the structure of a dataset is represented using the class
``sdv.Metadata``, which contains all the information that SDV needs in
order to optimally learn the dataset and generate synthetic versions of
it.

In order to create a ``Metadata`` for our dataset, you will first need
to import the class and create an empty instance:

.. ipython:: python
    :okexcept:

    from sdv import Metadata

    metadata = Metadata()
    metadata


Add a Table
-----------

Once you have your ``Metadata`` instance ready you can start adding
tables.

In this example, you will add the table ``users``, which is the parent
table of your dataset, indicating which is its Primary Key field,
``user_id``.

Note that indicating the Primary Key is optional and can be skipped if
your table has none, but if a table does not have one, you will not be
able to add any child tables to it.

.. ipython:: python
    :okexcept:

    metadata.add_table(
        name='users',
        data=tables['users'],
        primary_key='user_id'
    )

At this point, our metadata only contains one table and, of course, no
relationships:

.. ipython:: python
    :okexcept:

    metadata


However, the ``Metadata`` instance will have already analyzed all the
columns in the passed table and identified the different data types and
subtypes, and will properly indicate that the ``user_id`` column is the
table primary key.

You can see so by calling the ``visualize`` method of your ``metadata``
instance:

.. ipython:: python
    :okexcept:

    @suppress
    metadata.visualize('images/metadata_1.png');
    metadata.visualize();

.. image:: /images/metadata_1.png


Or you can obtain this information in a machine-readable format by
calling the ``get_table_meta`` method:

.. ipython:: python
    :okexcept:

    metadata.get_table_meta('users')


Add a Child Table
-----------------

Now that you have one parent table, you will add its child table
``sessions``, which is related to the ``users`` table in a parent-child
relationship where each ``user`` can have multiple ``sessions``, and
each ``session`` belongs to one and only one ``user``.

In order to specify this, while creating the ``sessions`` table you have
to indicate the name of the parent table, ``users``, and the field from
the ``sessions`` table that acts as the foreign key, which in this case
is called ``user_id``.

With this, apart from analyzing all the columns and indicating the
primary key like in the previous step, the ``Metadata`` instance will
specify a relationship between the two tables by adding a property to
the ``user_id`` field that indicates that it is related to the
``user_id`` field in the ``users`` table.

.. ipython:: python
    :okexcept:

    metadata.add_table(
        name='sessions',
        data=tables['sessions'],
        primary_key='session_id',
        parent='users',
        foreign_key='user_id'
    )

Now we can see how the table and the relationship have been registered:

.. ipython:: python
    :okexcept:

    metadata


Add a table specifying field properties
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are situations where the ``Metadata`` analysis is not able to
figure out some data types or subtypes, or to deduce some properties of
the field such as the datetime format.

In these situations, you can pass a dictionary with the exact metadata
of those fields, which will overwrite the deductions from the analysis
process.

In this next example, you will be adding a ``transactions`` table, which
is related to the previous ``sessions`` table, and contains a
``datetime`` field which needs to have the datetime format specified.

.. ipython:: python
    :okexcept:

    transactions_fields = {
        'timestamp': {
            'type': 'datetime',
            'format': '%Y-%m-%d'
        }
    }

    metadata.add_table(
        name='transactions',
        data=tables['transactions'],
        fields_metadata=transactions_fields,
        primary_key='transaction_id',
        parent='sessions'
    )

Let's see what our Metadata looks like right now:

.. ipython:: python
    :okexcept:

    metadata
    metadata.to_dict()

    @suppress
    metadata.visualize('images/metadata_2.png');
    metadata.visualize();

.. image:: /images/metadata_2.png


Metadata JSON format
--------------------

The ``Metadata`` objects can also be saved as a JSON file and later on
loaded from them.

In order to save the current ``metadata`` as a JSON file, all you need
to do is call the ``to_json`` method passing the path to the JSON file
that you want to create.

.. ipython:: python
    :okexcept:

    metadata.to_json('demo_metadata.json')

You can see that the contents of the created file are very similar to
the ``dict`` representation of the metadata:

.. ipython:: python
    :okexcept:

    with open('demo_metadata.json') as meta_file:
        print(meta_file.read())


After creating the JSON file, loading it back as a ``metadata`` object
is as simple as passing it to the ``Metadata`` constructor:

.. ipython:: python
    :okexcept:

    loaded = Metadata('demo_metadata.json')
    loaded
